Estimating Coronavirus Death Rate using US numbers

Published on April 23, 2020

Below are some calculations to estimate the death
rate for COVID-19 using US numbers from this
page:

https://www.worldometers.info/coronavirus/country/us

infected ~1M
deaths ~50K
Death rate estimate: 50K/1M = 1/20 = 5%

Of course this number is wrong.
The actual number should be ~ 0.2%.

Why the estimate is too big?

First, the reported number of cases is 10-50
times lower than the actual number of infections.
We know this from several independent studies.

This happens because there are not enough tests.
Most cases are asymptomatic or very mild, and
people will not be tested unless they meet
certain criteria (i.e. have severe symptoms).

Second, actual number of deaths is also wrong.
Many people die at home without being reported
and tested.

Let's try several numbers:

Infected: official (1M), 20*official (20M), 15%
of population (50M)
Deaths: official (50K), 2*official (100K)
The lowest death rate: 50K/50M = 0.001 = 0.1%

More realistic: 100K/50M = 0.005 = 0.2%

Also realistic: 100K/20M = 0.005 = 0.5%

How does it compare with regular flu? According
to CDC, since 2010 the annual deaths from Flu
were in range 12K - 61K annually. This gives
mortality rate for the flu:

minimum: 12K/330M => 0.004%

maximum: 61K/330M => 0.02%

The COVID-19 estimates are much higher (0.1%-0.5%).

How many people need to die to achieve herd
immunity? Suppose herd immunity can be achieved
when ~70% of population is immune. Then for death
rate 0.2%, we can estimate how many people need
to die to achieve this:

330M * 70% * 0.2% => 462K

This is a lot of dying. As of today, the number
of deaths in the US is much smaller. 

So - lockdown saves lives.
