If US will follow Sweden and remove lockdown, we
will end up with more than 300,000 deaths.

Published on April 24, 2020

Here are some calculations. Sweden population is
~10M, Stockholm population is ~1M. As of today
(April 24, 2020) they have reported 17,600 cases
for the whole country, and 2,152 deaths.

At the same time they claim that ~20% of
population in Stockholm is already immune. Let's
assume that the share of infected people for the
whole country is a bit smaller ( ~15%). Then we
can estimate the total number of infected in
Sweden as 1.5M. Note that this is ~ 100 times
more than reported on worldometers.info web site
(17K).

Let's estimate the death rate: 2.15K/1.5M =
0.0014, or 0.14%

This is in agreement with the death rates
estimated in other countries. If we take their
death rate and estimate how many people will die
when they reach herd immunity at 70% infected, we
will get: Number of deaths = 10M * 0.7 * 0.0014 =
9.8K

So, approximately 10 thousand people will end up
dying in Sweden. Probably even more, because the
reported death numbers are too low (because
deaths are lagging behind, and also because there
are always at-home not-tested not-reported
deaths).

Suppose we do similar calculation for US with
population 330M. Assuming the same low death rate
of 0.0014 (one out of 700 people), we will get:
330M population * 70% infected * 0.14% death rate
= 323K . The actual number of deaths will be
higher, of course.

So, what is happening in Sweden is not a mystery.
They simply allow people to die. I am happy that
US government uses lockdown to prevent huge
number of deaths.

Here is a CNBC post about Sweden which describes
the numbers there -
https://www.cnbc.com/2020/04/22/no-lockdown-in-
sweden-but-stockholm-could-see-herd-immunity-in-
weeks.html